The dataset I used for this project is the World Happiness Report. The data is
collected by Gallup World Poll, a global survey which spans 140+ countries
which they claim to cover 95% of global adults, the survey is conducted via
face-to-face interviews or telephone. more than 100,000 people are surveyed
each year, but only about 1000 people per country each year. The timing, 
techniques, and sampling locations are carried out to account for error. e.g.
Gallup accounts for seasonal changes, war, and other factors which might
contribute to random error. The "Life evaluation (3-year average)" column in 
particular is measured in a universal fashion. Not every country has a scale 
from 1 to 10 funnily enough. In the dataset, the 6 factors and "Dystopia + 
Residual" columns were added starting in 2019 after they concluded they
somewhat correlate with happiness rather than causing it. Unemployment and
equality are not accounted for because they aren't available yet for the full
sample of countries and they ostensibly have a weaker correlation with
happiness then the other measures. All these methods, using three-year 
averages, accounting for cultural and regional differences all sound accurate.

But there are several limitations which may make WHR unrepresentative of 
happiness across the world however. As of 2026, there are a total of 195 
recognised countries in the world. And the WHR has only included 147 of those 
countries in the latest findings (in 2025). They mention that they don't 
survey small or inaccessible populations due to it being cost-ineffective to 
travel to. This could bring up many questions. Like, at what point would the
state be accessible, and hence cost-effective to travel to? What is the 
minimum population they are willing to assess? Depending on their answers,
specific states will be completely unaccounted for which skews the rankings 
with states with higher populations. Another possible limitation of the WHR
would be subjectivity within the measurements themselves. Although the method
they use to gather results for "Life evaluation (3-year average)" is 
universal, countries will still see them completely different. Like in western
culture, a 10/10 is seen as perfection so it is rarely given out. 8-9 is
considered high praise. But in eastern culture, they may prioritise collective
thinking rather than indivualism. Because of this, ratings may converge to 
8-9, or skew downwards, or any combination of data. Even if these limitations
are unaccounted for, the WHR still seems like accurate representation of
worldwide happiness, as each country has some context for their individual
rank, like Finland being ~0.2 above 2nd place almost every year, they seem to
be doing the right things.

There were a few assumptions that I have made about the dataset.
• the "Life evaluation (3-year average)" column is representative of 
  happiness - the happiness ranking is based on life evaluation, a question
  derived from the Cantril ladder.
• 5 entries across a span of 5 years is enough to filter out anomalous 
  observations - after seeing a few outliers with only 2 to 4 entries, 
  I decided to remove them as they would not be ranked fairly due to the
  other countries having at least 20+ entries. 


During the cleaning process, I didn't really manipulate the data much.
I did remove the upper and lower bound of life_eval as I felt that the margin
of error wasn't needed in this analysis due to the focus on correlations.
Other than that, removing empty columns and renaming them for readability made 
it easier for me to analyse. 

I aimed to answer these three questions during my analysis:

Q1: Does money (GDP) correlate with happiness? With high-income countries, is
    the relationship linear or diminishing?
Q2: Does generosity correlate with happiness? Does it remain significant when
    accounting for other social, economic factors?
Q3: What common characteristics define countries that consistently improve in 
    happiness rankings over time, and what factors might explain these 
    trends?


The results prove to be interesting. Log(GDP) had a moderate postive 
correlation with happiness (0.682). As expected, having more money is
correlated to having more happiness, although, log(GDP) is used so we can't
conclude that the relationship is diminishing. Generosity has no correlation
with happiness, removing generosity resulted in a small decrease in model
performance by -0.019, and generosity yielded the lowest coefficient when
standardising for all features, which all surprisingly enough, point to
generosity being insignficant in context to happiness. social support (having
someone to talk to) seems to be correlated with top improvers in happiness,
freedom to make life choices sees small increases in improvers, and the other
factors seem to be uncorrelated. Notably, GDP isn't a key characteristic in
improvers. So, the only telling characteristic when it comes to improvers is
having someone to talk to during rough times. Who knew human connection is
what we needed!

Overall, this analysis has been very interesting. We will never be able to
quantify human emotion in data and statistics but discovering that
social support being correlated with happier countries, but specifically
generosity being uncorrelated was very surprising. Working through this 
dataset has given me a wider perspective when looking at happiness in 
different countries, and hence different perspectives. Looking at the stories
behind the decliners was insightful and I am eager for the WHR 2026 data!